The theme of my opening talk
to you dear Gilead students,
and really for all of us,
is “Imitate Jesus’ Modesty.”
Now, first we ask,
What is modesty?
Well, a common definition
found in our publications is
‘being aware of our own limitations.’
And Jesus, of course, set a perfect example
in always being aware
of his own limitations.
Undoubtedly, Jesus was very familiar
with Jehovah’s thinking on this quality,
such as is expressed at Micah 6:8,
which was written about 700 years
before Jesus came to the earth.
So he certainly would have been
familiar with this.
But, if you recall, the question is asked,
“What is Jehovah requiring of you?”
And then part of the answer is
“to walk in modesty with your God!”
And there’s an exclamation point
after that expression.
Jehovah would not just like to see it in us;
he’s requiring it.
What is Jehovah requiring of you?
Jesus knew it was not optional,
but a requirement,
that we be modest in walking with our God.
Now, since Jesus
is our perfect role model,
let’s discuss four areas
in which we can imitate his modesty.
And we know
that’ll be helpful to you dear students
—really, for all of us.
Number one, Jesus was always aware
that he had authority limitations.
Now, you remember
the account in Matthew chapter 20,
when James and John tried to use their mother
to get some special positions
in the Kingdom for them.
And remember, they had her say to Jesus:
“Give the word that these two sons
of mine may sit down,
“one at your right hand and one at your left,
in your Kingdom.”
Remember that?
But what was Jesus’ answer?
“To sit down
at my right hand and my left
“is not mine to give,
“but it belongs to those
for whom it has been prepared by my Father.”
Now, that’s interesting.
Jesus gave many gifts, didn’t he?
He gave a lot of wine
to a newly married couple
at their wedding feast.
He gave the gift of healing
to thousands, probably.
He fed thousands; he gave them food.
He gave a widow her son back after he died.
But Jesus knew to give away
the second and third
highest positions in the Kingdom
was beyond the scope of his authority.
And he acknowledged that very clearly,
didn’t he?
Well, that’s a fine lesson for us, isn’t it?
There are many things
that are within the scope of our authority,
and we can go ahead
and take the initiative and do those things.
But there are many other things
that are outside the scope of our authority.
For example, you wives,
you know there are many things in the family
that have to be decided by the husband
—not within your authority.
You brothers know there are many decisions
that are made in the congregation
that can’t be made by you;
it must be made by the body of elders.
We all know that in our Bethel department
there are many things
that require permission from our overseer.
If some of you brothers here in the class
end up later serving on Branch Committees,
then you’ll need to clearly learn
the parameters of your authority
—what you can handle and what really needs
to be handled by the Branch Committee
or maybe even taken
to the Governing Body.
In areas such as the foregoing,
all of us need to carefully learn
what falls within our authority
and what falls outside of our authority.
And if we’re in doubt,
it’s better to check, isn’t it?
It’s better to check if we’re in doubt.
We don’t have the attitude
that it’s easier to get
forgiveness than permission.
That’s not a good attitude, is it?
Now, another aspect
of Jesus having authority limitations—
Open up to John chapter 12,
and here’s an interesting thought
that Jesus made.
John 12:49
—he said:
“For I have not spoken
“of my own initiative,
“but the Father who sent me
“has himself given me a commandment
about what to say and what to speak.”
Now, you could say according to that
that Jesus had
speaking-authority limitations, didn’t he?
He had no authority to go
beyond what his Father had taught him.
He had no authority to teach others things
that originated in his own mind and heart.
He wouldn’t go beyond that.
He had authority limitations.
Well, even more so,
shouldn’t that be true of us?
We have no authority
to give our opinions on matters,
but we have to make sure when we speak
that what we say
is solidly based on the Scriptures
and what’s been provided
by the faithful slave.
But now let’s go to our second area
where we can learn modesty from Jesus:
He always remembered
his lesser importance
compared
to Jehovah’s much greater importance.
How unlike Satan the Devil!
Now, you could say he has
not one modest bone in his spirit body,
figuratively speaking, of course
—no modesty in Satan the Devil.
Jesus refused to accept titles
that belonged to Jehovah.
“Why do you call me good?
Nobody is good except one, God.”
He always gave the credit
—the glory—to Jehovah.
He said: “The Son cannot do
a single thing of his own initiative,
but only what he sees the Father doing.”
He never boasted.
He was always willing
to put Jehovah’s will ahead of his own will.
He made the comment:
“Father, if it is not possible
“for this to pass away unless I drink it,
let your will take place.”
And think about this:
He never tried to draw attention to himself
by means of high-sounding vocabulary
or even by means of his dress and grooming.
See, if he would have had
some unusual dress or grooming,
would Judas have needed to kiss him
to identify which one he was?
He could’ve said,
“The one you’re looking for
is the only one in the group
wearing a bright purple robe,”
or “He’s the only one in the group
that has a handlebar mustache.”
He wouldn’t have had to kiss him
to identify him.
And if you look at the pictures
in our publications
with Jesus and the Twelve,
it would be hard to describe
which one he was.
He modestly blended in
with all of the others.
Now, what a fine example for us!
When others try to praise us,
including our Bible students,
we should modestly redirect that praise
to where it belongs.
We should always give credit to Jehovah
for what we accomplish.
I mean, we accomplish it,
but we give Jehovah the credit.
First Corinthians 4:7:
“What do you have that you did not receive?
“If, in fact, you did receive it,
why do you boast
as though you did not receive it?”
And in harmony (or in the same vein)
with that scripture,
we try hard not to boast,
remembering Proverbs 27:2:
“Let someone else praise you,
and not your own mouth.”
We do our best
to put Jehovah’s preferences
ahead of our own preferences.
We endeavor not to draw
attention to ourselves
by high-sounding vocabulary
or even immodest dress and grooming.
But now let’s go to a third area
where we can learn modesty from Jesus:
He knew there were some things
he was not entitled to know,
at least not at the time.
Open up to Matthew chapter 24, please.
And we’re familiar with this scripture,
but at Matthew 24:36,
notice Jesus’ words:
“Concerning that day
and hour nobody knows,
“neither the angels of the heavens
“nor the Son,
but only the Father.”
Now, think about it, if Jesus was content
with having knowledge limitations
concerning confidential things,
then even more so
shouldn’t that be the case with us?
We should strive very hard
not to ever try to get to know
confidential things
we’re not entitled to know.
And we certainly shouldn’t reveal
confidential things.
And what a protection it is!
I was thinking,
for you dear wives of elders,
if someone asked you
about a certain confidential matter,
“Do you know anything about this?”
Now, if you know, which you shouldn’t,
it’s very awkward, isn’t it?
You either have to be untruthful
or you have to reveal that your husband
didn’t keep confidentiality.
But if you don’t know,
as should be the case,
now with a clear conscience
you can answer that question
with a resounding no.
“No, I do not know anything about that.”
You dear elders would not try to obtain
confidential information
in the congregation
or at Bethel you’re not entitled to know.
Like Jesus,
all of us should be content
to wait for information
to be revealed to us
at the proper time.
And if you think about it, in some cases,
it may mean that we will have to be content
to never know certain things.
Now, let’s get to our last area,
this fourth area
we can learn modesty from Jesus,
and that is:
He was always aware
of his need to fully rely on Jehovah.
Even though he was perfect,
he did not rely on his own strength.
Open, please, to Hebrews chapter 5.
This is a beautiful scripture
about this perfect Son of God
—what is said about him.
Hebrews 5:7:
“During his life on earth,
“Christ offered up supplications
“and also petitions,
“[and notice] with strong outcries
“and tears,
“to the One who was able
to save him out of death,
and he was favorably heard
for his godly fear.”
Now, isn’t that interesting?
“During his life on earth”
(and it didn’t say
just a few times or one or two times)
—during his life,
he petitioned, and it’s plural.
And he gave supplication, again plural.
And what were the intensities
of those supplications and petitions?
“With strong outcries and tears”
he called for help from Jehovah,
and Jehovah heard him.
I mean,
if you think of the word “outcry,”
that means “a cry out loud”
—doesn’t it?—
a strong outcry,
a very loud cry out loud.
And then you add tears to that.
It really indicates the intensity
—how he really called
on Jehovah to help him.
That’s an interesting thought, isn’t it?
Additionally,
when Jehovah sent
Jesus’ younger angelic brothers
to come and help him in times of need,
he didn’t say:
“Well, I don’t need help.
[pridefully] I’m OK. I’ve got this.”
No, he knew he needed help.
And he graciously accepted it
and appreciated that help.
Think about this:
Even with Jehovah’s help,
he was modestly realistic
of what he expected of himself.
Have you ever thought about that?
With Jehovah’s help,
he was still modestly realistic
that he could only accomplish so much.
As an example,
during his three-and-a-half-year ministry,
he knew there were only so many
he could reach—only so many people.
So, wisely, what did he do?
He modestly trained and entrusted others
to do the preaching work
and even said about them
as recorded at John 14:12
that they would ‘do works
greater  than his works.’
They would reach
a greater number of people,
a greater area,
a greater period of time.
Now, think about this,
if the perfect Son of God
feared to rely on his own strength,
we should be scared to death to do that.
We do not rely on our own strength.
Never should we pridefully hold back
from supplicating and petitioning Jehovah
with strong outcries and tears.
May we modestly accept
the help Jehovah provides
through our brothers and sisters.
May we be modestly realistic
of even what we expect of ourselves.
If we imitate Jesus’ modesty,
these four areas we’ve discussed,
what a protection it will be!
It will protect us
from many snares of the Devil.